## The problem with over-customizing
There are basically two schools of thought out there. Those who customize the shit out of their environment and those who try to keep it basic. I think the truth lies somewhere in between. Sure, customizing your command line tools like tmux (but also bash, zsh, vim, emacs, you name it) can maximize your personal productivity. You can use aliases and custom key bindings to execute some really fancy commands in a wink. Even better: you don't have to memorize all those complex commands and parameters.

The downside becomes apparent when you're working with others. All of a sudden you're used to your heavily customized environment and struggle using anything else. And now think about those poor souls who will find themselves in a situation where they need to use your setup and have to give up on some basic tasks just because your "well-crafted" config is standing in their way. Some of my colleagues are very good at letting me know when my urge to customize my configs is getting out of hand by simply refusing to do pair programming on my machine as long as I dont "fix" something they can't use. And rightly so!

There are lots of heavily modified configs out there (TODO: link awesome vim) that surely are handy when you know how to use them. However, it takes lots of time to learn the ins and outs of those configs and chances are you're never going to use nearly close of all the features those configs will provide.

My advice for you is to start simple and basic. Learn how your tools are meant to be used in their basic configs, find out about their striking downsides and fix them along the way. Feel free to research on more ways to improve and optimize your config but always keep in mind that the next poor soul that feels helpless being confronted with your system might just be sitting next to you. Keep a sane middle ground, try stuff out but make sure that nothing gets in the way of actually using your tools without having to read through 500 lines of manuals and configs first.
